# Linux

## Commands

Commands are case sensitive.
Most commands follow a simple pattern: `command [options…] [arguments…]`.

Options: Alter the behaviour of the command
Arguments: Values for the command to act upon.

Options can be used seperately or combined:

```bash
aptitude -v -v moo
aptitude -vv moo
```

- `ls`: lists all files in current directory (default in alphabetical order).
- `ls -l /var/log`: Lists all files long listed in the specified directory.
- `ls -l -S -r /var/log`: Lists all files long listed in the specified directory in reversed order by size.
- `pwd`: Tells you what your current locations in the filesystem is.
- `cd`: Change your current directory.
- `cd ..`: Go a directory back in the tree.
- `cd ~`: Brings you to the home directory of the current user.
- `su`: Lets you temporarily acts as a different user.
- `su -l <user>`: Shows login shell to provide password.
- `sudo <command>`: Allows a user to execute a command as root user without creating a new shell.
- `sudo -u <user> <command>`: Allows a user to execute a command as user named user without creating a new shell.
- `chmod <SET><ACTION><PERMISSION> <file>`: Change permissions of a file or directory (only for root user or owner of file).
- `chown`: Change ownership of a file (can only be done with administrative priviliges).
- `sudo chown root hello.sh`: Change ownership of `hello.sh` to root user.
- `cat`: Quickly view contents of small files.
- `head`: View contents at the top of a file.
- `tail -n 5 animals.txt`: View 5 last rows the end of `animals.txt` file.
- `cp <source> <destination>`: Copy file file to a new destination.
- `dd`: Copy files or partitions at the bit level.
- `mv <source> <destination>`: Move a file from one directory to another. Can be used to rename a file.
- `rm <file>`: Remove a file.
- `rm -r <directory>`: Remove a directory.
- `grep <pattern> <file>`: Search for specified pattern in a file and returns lines with a match.
- `shutdown <time>`: Shut the system down in specified amount of time. You can use `+minutes`, `now` or `hh:mm`.
- `ifconfig`: Display network configuration information.
- `ping <destination-ip>`: Verify connectivity between two computers.
- `ps`: List running processes in the current terminal.
- `ps -e -f`: List all running processes on the machine with more details.
- `apt-get`: Tool to install install, update and delete software (requires administrative priviliges).
- `sudo apt-get update`: Refresh the list of packages.
- `sudo apt-get upgrade`: Update all packages and dependencies.
- `apt-cache search <keyword>`: Search for keywords in packages.
- `sudo apt-get install <package>`: Install a package.
- `sudo apt-get remove <package>`: Deletes all package files but not the configuration files for the package.
- `sudo apt-get purge <package>`: Deletes all package files.
- `passwd <user>`: Update a user's password (root can change everyone's password).
- `echo <text>`: Print output to the terminal.
- `touch <file-name>`: Creates a new file in the current directory.
- `mkdir <dir-name>`: Creates a new directory in the current directory.

### Paths

Absolute path: Specifies the exact location of a directory starting from the root with a `/`.
Relative path: Gives directions to a file relative to your current location in the filesystem.

### Files

```bash
-rw-r--r-- 1 root   root  18047 Dec 20  2017 alternatives.log       
            
drwxr-x--- 2 root   adm    4096 Dec 20  2017 apache2  
```

The `d` symbol at the beginning means it is a directory and the `-` symbol at the beginning means it is a file. The rest of the symbols are for indicating permissions in the following order OWNER-GROUP-OTHER.

### Permissions

#### Types

- Read (r)
- Write (w)
- Execute (x)

#### Sets

- u: User
- g: Group
- o: Others
- a: All

#### Actions

- +: Add permission
- =: Specify the exact permission
- -: Remove permission

### Redirections

I/O Redirections: The input or output of a command is redirected from its default destination to a different location.

- Standard Input (STDIN): Information the command receives and processes when it is executed, essentially what a user types on the keyboard.
- Standard Output (STDOUT): The information that the command displays.
- Standard Error (STDERR): Error messages generated by commands that are not correctly executed.

To redirect STDOUT you have to use `[COMMAND] > [FILE]`, for example: `echo "I like food." > newfile1.txt`.

### Archives

Most packages are packed using tar and gzip.

- `tar xzf latest.tar.gz`: Unpacks the zipped tar file (extract).
- `tar czf newarchive.tar.gz <dir-name>`: Create and zip new tar file (create).
- `unzip example.zip`: Unzip a zip file.
- `zip newexample.zip *`: Zips all files in the current directory.

### Text editor

The basic text editor is `vi`. It has 3 modes:

- Command mode: Type commands (return to command mode by `Esc`).
- Insert mode: Add text to the document.
- Ex mode: View or change settings as well as opening, saving or aborting changes (save changes: `:w`, quit file: `:q`)./

